So during these two minutes, I'm going to ask a few questions.
I think the sound is better like this. Can you hear me?
Yeah.
So I heard a comment that color was not allowed, so I hope that you won't mind if I use 3D instead.
But the screen and the actual device I'm going to talk about is black and white.
Who uses a calculator from time to time?
Who uses a calculator from the smartphone or whatever?
Yeah, it's the majority.
Who uses HP style calculators?
Not that many. It's mostly.
Who uses calculators for binary computations?
Okay. Complex numbers in matrices, graphing.
Okay. Just checking.
So I don't think that the camera can zoom that far, right?
So I can't show that. I suspect.
Yeah, it'll be hard.
But this is the device I'm talking about. You're going to speak.
I'll hold up a sign. 5 minutes for question time.
Yep.
It's the dots.
Is it also?
For me it is.
I don't know what's wrong with my timer. It's Android.
Okay.
So I'm Christophe D'Alincia.
I'm working as a senior principle software engineer at Red Hat,
working on confidential computing.
I'm giving a talk on this topic this afternoon.
But today I'm talking about a pet project of mine called GB48X,
which is an open source HP48 style calculator for modern ARM hardware.
So I talked about this last year,
and I'm going to show how much progress we made since then.
I start with a reminder of what GB48X is.
We are going to review last year's future plans to see how well we did.
I'm going to talk from one engineer to another.
That's why I asked the questions at the beginning
to see why we need all this math in the calculator.
I'm going to extoll the virtues of 1980s era efficiency
when there were only keyboards, no touchscreen, no fancy mouse,
all that stuff.
I'm going to explain how using much bigger numbers
led to much less memory usage.
And we are going to see a number of bells, whistles,
and engineering units along the way.
So I hope you enjoyed.
Strap on.
What is GB48X?
The idea is really to revive Schullet's Packard's iconic reverse
polish list on modern ARM hardware.
So that's what the original box looked like.
And a quick primer on the project.
We want to simply put, reinvent the best calculators in the world.
Nothing yet, less.
It's designed to run on existing hardware from a company in Switzerland
called Swiss Micro that does these kind of devices.
So you see the DM32 on the right and the DM42 on the left.
The specs for the project are from the HP manuals,
and there are dozens of them.
Unfortunately, they contradict one another
because values calculators do not do exactly the same thing.
So it's implemented in a language called reverse polish list,
or RPL, which is a stack-based language, very powerful.
It's based on common line and menus that you activate
with keys below, function keys below the keyboard, the screen side.
It has many data types and mathematical operations.
I'm going to talk about this later.
And many enhancements in the project compared to what HP did.
Now, is this still minimalist?
Well, you bet, because that machine has 70K of free RAM
and 700K total for the program space, hence the title of the talk.
So it's a low-power Cortex M4 at 80 MHz.
The battery life is up to three years on this kind of battery,
and one of the things that is nice is that the screen is passive,
so when you switch off the calculators, it displays a picture,
and the picture stays there forever.
So that's where I have pictures of my wife and my calculator.
The machine has only 96K of RAM,
and if you remove the bitmap, which is a high-res bitmap,
and the operating system needs,
then you get to the 70K I was talking about.
So 96K is 1.5,64 for the old-timers among us.
It has only 2 megabytes of flash.
It has 8 megs in the chip, but 6 are for a flash disk,
and so there are 700K remaining for your program.
That's less than a Macintosh floppy disk.
They were 800K.
The project did hit these limits quite hard.
I'm going to explain how we worked around that.
So last year I explained that I had to restart from scratch
from a project called new RPL because we hit these limits.
This year around Christmas, I hit the limits again,
so I had to restart from rescratch,
at least as far as the similar computations are concerned.
So I'm going to explain that.
So let's review last year's future plans.
I think there is a problem with this one.
Is this one okay, or is it...
Yeah, okay.
So I said, you know, back in 2023, I was young and naive,
and I said a lot remains to be done.
So I was talking about adding complex numbers,
vector and matrix arithmetic,
about 1500 functions that were left to implement,
and key features like plotting and graphing.
So what did we do?
Well, a lot of this was done.
Complex numbers are available,
and they are actually much better than the original.
For instance, you can have polar and rectangular.
You have the usual notations.
You have stuff like that.
We have vector and matrix arithmetic fully implemented,
and we have algebra, but also with exact computations
like fractions inside matrices.
So you never get a rounding error
unlike on the HP calculators.
That's the test suite.
So the test suite runs on a simulator on Linux or Mac OS,
and it currently runs about 2,200 tests.
Not everything is tested.
That, for instance, is implemented but not tested yet.
And we have plotting and graphing,
at least the basic features, like drawing stuff, etc.,
with some nice enhancements compared to what HP did.
Like, for instance, we can have plots with various sizes
and plot patterns, so I'm going to show that in a moment.
And that lets you draw multiple things on the same screen
and see what the different pieces are.
It just was very fast on the screen here.
So how did we go to use only 70K?
It's a story of ultimate over-engineering.
It's C++ with garbage collection
and ubiquitous bad packing all over the place.
Let me explain what I mean with that.
A C++ object typically looks like this.
You have a class, and the way this is represented in memory
is you have a virtual table pointer,
and then you have the value for the object,
so in that case, for the integer,
you'd have an integer value or an enzyme value.
And then there's some overhead for malloc.
It's self-operated or whatever.
You have, for instance, a linked list or a free list
or something like that.
So overall, for your object representing an enzyme value,
you typically use 12 bytes.
12 bytes, that's on a 32-bit CPU.
That lets you represent all values up to 4 billion,
and it's fixed size.
You can't remove it in memory.
Not good. Let's do better.
So the representation we used looks like something like that.
We use LB128, which is a system that is used,
for instance, in Dwarf all over the place.
And there let's us code the ID that is used
to identify the type of object as one byte for integers.
We have 128 types that we can represent with one byte.
And the value, if it's less than 128, is also on one byte.
So that means that I use only two bytes of memory
that's a 6x factor compared to the other representation
for all values below 128.
And I can move to infinity because the LB128
is a variable size encoding,
so I can essentially have numbers that are as big as I want.
It's now a variable size object, and I can move it.
So it's a vast improvement.
That lets me have a memory organization
where I have at the bottom of memory all the global variables,
the global objects that I keep.
It's essentially a name, a value, a name, a value.
And then, so they are all packed together.
And then on top of that, I have temporaries
that move with a temporary pointer
that moves as you allocate objects.
And then there is an editor, scratch pad,
and the transient stuff on top of that.
Because it's all contiguous,
the way to reach the next object is to skip
by reading the ID and computing the size
to get to the next object.
So on top of memory, you have root pointers
that point back to, like, the stack,
the local variables, that kind of stuff,
that point back to this memory area at the bottom.
And the root pointers can point inside objects.
That's a very important property for performance.
For instance, if you follow the one link,
you'll see that it points just behind,
I think, like, with curly braces.
It means it's part of a list,
and I can put the value that is inside the list
directly on the stack.
So I can do the computations faster that way.
And there is also a series of smart pointer classes,
the names and in other score G in the source code,
that let me have garbage-collected smart pointers.
The allocation is super cheap,
because it's essentially I'm moving the pointer
at the top of the scratch space, like this.
So it's just one addition and one comparison,
and the comparison is to see,
okay, am I out of memory, do I need to garbage-collect?
So a very, very cheap allocation.
The garbage collection itself, as you, you know,
your memory grows and you allocate more and more stuff,
so at some point, memory gets slow.
The unreferenced temporaries, you no longer need them,
so what you do is you copy the reference object down
and you adjust the pointers,
and then you move the editing part of the scratch pad down,
and you reclaim your free space that way.
So the good point of this approach is that there is no memory
of a head at all.
There is not a single byte that is used for metadata
or linked list or anything like that.
The sub-objects, so pointers to objects inside a list,
for instance, don't cost me extra at all either.
If you know something about garbage collectors
and you think of a market-suit garbage collector,
for instance, it needs some metadata about sub-objects,
and so that means you have extra costs
for objects inside objects.
And it's a single-pass garbage collector,
so it's simple code, easy to maintain,
but the downside is that it's slow.
It's essentially a quadratic behavior,
number of stack objects times number of objects
instead of linear or close to linear that you could get otherwise.
So it's a usual trade-off of space for speed.
So why use C++ at all?
Well, it's because of template metaprogramming,
and let me explain why this matters.
So the guy that you see in the photo there is a guy named David van der Vorder,
and he's a Belgian guy who initiated me to C++ metaprogramming
back in 1998 when we were in the C++ HP compiler team.
So the guys you see in the background are the HP compiler team back in 1998,
and that guy is super, super smart
and initiated me to template metaprogramming
before it was even possible,
so we were dreaming about doing these things.
But now you can, and let me explain why it matters.
I'm going to represent code as data using metaprogramming,
not because we can, just for the sake of it,
but because I have to.
So let me talk about bug number 12 in our project.
You compute 1.2 plus 3.4, and it hangs on battery power.
So how do you reproduce this bug?
You don't use the technique shown on the right.
Instead, you simply type 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, plus,
and the calculator sits there, not doing the computation.
And your users call you and say,
did you even test the thing?
So you scratch your head, how did I miss that?
Well, the fact is it hangs only on battery power,
and as soon as you plug the USB cable,
the computation resumes and you get the result.
You can guess that I did my testing with the USB cable on.
So what is this bug?
This one was a bit hard to find.
It turns out that the chip has an execute in place feature
that works, it's supposed to work on the external chip,
something called the QSPI interface,
except it just lacks battery power,
or a power juice when it's on battery.
And so essentially it sits there waiting for the cycle to complete,
and it completes it when you plug the power.
Okay, so that means I have to move as much of my mathematics
into data that I can read from the QSPI
as opposed to code that I cannot put there.
That's why I only have 700K, otherwise I'd have two makes.
So how do I use C++ metaprogramming to do that?
Let's see a description of an interesting math rule,
and that's how you expand polynomials.
So you know the rule, you see the first rule,
for instance, X plus Y times Z,
you turn that into X times Z plus Y times Z,
and you see that's exactly what you see in the code.
So the code contains essentially the mathematical formula
as you're applying.
That's neat, right?
Now, here's a guess.
How many bytes of code does that generate?
Give me a guess.
Nobody wants to want to guess.
Okay, that's the assembly code.
12 bytes.
So that code generates 12 bytes of code,
but it generates tons of read-only data,
which is good because I can move that to my QSPI.
So the magic is this ugly metaprogramming code
that generates constant arrays,
and I taught the C++ compiler how to generate
RPL objects from C++ expressions.
Isn't that cool?
And so that's how you get 12 bytes of code,
tons of data that I don't care about,
I have plenty of that data space free
and no executing place needed.
So in the end, how much math in 700K?
Well, it turns out that for another reason,
I'm now back under 500K,
so I'm within the limit that we all heard about,
the 640K that ought to be enough for everybody, right?
So from one engineer to another, what do we have?
So we have base numbers for engineers
in the computer field, that's really fancy.
In any base, I can compute in base 17 or 34 if you want,
or three.
With any size, you can compute on 13 bits
or 512 bits if you want.
We have complex numbers that's useful for electrical engineering,
and we have phases that are dealt with
with exact results if we can,
so like exact fractions and stuff like that.
We have linear algebra, and here two exact results
when we can.
Statistics, which is useful for field science.
Degree minutes, second support,
so that's if you're doing, you know,
maritime navigation or stuff like that,
that's really handy, you have a really nice shortcut for that.
Unit conversions, if you want to land something on Mars
without crashing it, because some guy in the US
is using really ridiculous units.
And symbolic processing, which is useful for math gigs.
About 1980s era efficiency.
I have this magic menu, it's the key at the top,
next to the A symbol, and essentially it selects
the right menu depending on the type of the object on the stack.
So very few key strokes to get exactly the functions
that are most useful for what I'm working on.
Equation data entry, I use a single key to enter
the symbol that they limit expressions,
and when I'm inside, that's the quotes in RPL,
but once I'm inside an expression, I no longer need these quotes,
so I hit the same key and I get parentheses instead.
And same thing with the equal sign that you see at the bottom,
it evaluates an expression, so it's the eval function of RPL,
but if you're inside an equation, then it says,
well, I'm inserting an equal sign because I'm trading an equation,
and if I'm inside parentheses, it's inserting a semicolon
instead to separate function arguments.
Exactly symbol data entry, that's for your gigs.
So when you type a hash sign,
the cursor changes to a B, that's for base numbers,
and it says now the ABCD keys, you don't need to shift them or anything,
you just get ABCD.
DMS data entry dot dot dot, and yep, and a one key function.
Okay.
Just my conclusion that I cannot answer the question
because I still have 200k to go, so see you next year, guys.
Thank you.
So the next speaker can set up.
Is there any time for questions?
Yes, there's five questions.
We'll have one for the next speaker.
Yeah.
But I don't see the next speaker.
No questions, seriously?
Who wants to help with this project?
I'll just give my laptop.
You know, it's 20.
Okay.
We'll just give my laptop.
Does that rock?
Does the calculator have a beeper?
Yes.
That's a good question.
So let me...
I'll use the voice.
Oh.
I think it will be a full row.
So here we go.
Okay.
Now it's your world of activities.